# Calculate Likelihoods for Alternative Relationships

For each specified pair of individuals, calculate the log10-likelihoods
of being PO, FS, HS, GP, FA, HA, U (see Details). Individuals must be
genotyped or have at least one genotyped offspring.

**NOTE:** values \\\>0\\ are various `NA` types, see 'Likelihood special
codes' in 'Value' section below.

**NOTE 2:** Relationship between a dummy/non-genotyped individual and
another are expressed as relationships with *that dummies offspring*.
So, if e.g. ID1=F0001 and ID2=i003_2001_M, and TopRel=FA, that means
that dummy female F0001 is likely a full sibling of i003_2001_M. For
further details see below.

## Usage

``` r
CalcPairLL(
  Pairs = NULL,
  GenoM = NULL,
  Pedigree = NULL,
  LifeHistData = NULL,
  AgePrior = TRUE,
  SeqList = NULL,
  Module = "ped",
  Complex = "full",
  Herm = "no",
  InclDup = FALSE,
  Err = 1e-04,
  ErrFlavour = "version2.9",
  Tassign = 0.5,
  Tfilter = -2,
  quiet = FALSE,
  Plot = TRUE
)
```

## Arguments

- Pairs:

  dataframe with columns `ID1` and `ID2`, and optionally

  Sex1

  :   Sex of ID1, 1=female, 2=male, 3=unknown, or `NA` to take from
      `LifeHistData`. The sex of individuals occurring as parent in
      `Pedigree` cannot be altered.

  Sex2

  :   Sex of ID2

  AgeDif

  :   Age difference in whole time units, BirthYear1 - BirthYear2 (i.e.
      positive if ID2 is born before ID1). If `NA`, calculated from
      `LifeHistData`. Use '999' to explicitly specify 'unknown'.

  focal

  :   relationship character abbreviation; PO, FS, HS, GP or U. See
      Details for its effect and explanation of abbreviations. Default:
      U.

  patmat

  :   1=maternal relatives, 2=paternal relatives. Only relevant for HS &
      GP, for which it defaults to Sex1, or 1 if Sex1=3, but is
      currently only predictably implemented for pairs of two genotyped
      individuals. Always equal to Sex2 for PO pairs when Sex2 is known.

  dropPar1

  :   Drop the parents of `ID1` before calculating the pair likelihood,
      rather than conditioning on them; choose from 'none', 'dam',
      'sire', or 'both'. See example. If e.g. the pair shares a common
      mother, 'none' and 'sire' will condition on this shared mother and
      not calculate the likelihood that they are maternal siblings,
      while dropPar1='dam' or 'both' will calculate that likelihood, and
      the other likelihoods as if the mother of ID1 were unknown.

  dropPar2

  :   as `dropPar1`, for `ID2`

- GenoM:

  numeric matrix with genotype data: One row per individual, one column
  per SNP, coded as 0, 1, 2, missing values as a negative number or NA.
  Row names must be individual IDs, column names are ignored. You can
  reformat data with
  [`GenoConvert`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/GenoConvert.md), or
  use other packages to get it into a genlight object and then use
  `as.matrix`.

- Pedigree:

  dataframe with columns id-dam-sire; likelihoods will be calculated
  conditional on the pedigree. May include non-genotyped individuals,
  which will be treated as dummy individuals.

- LifeHistData:

  data.frame with up to 6 columns:

  ID

  :   max. 30 characters long

  Sex

  :   1 = female, 2 = male, 3 = unknown, 4 = hermaphrodite, other
      numbers or NA = unknown

  BirthYear

  :   birth or hatching year, integer, with missing values as NA or any
      negative number.

  BY.min

  :   minimum birth year, only used if BirthYear is missing

  BY.max

  :   maximum birth year, only used if BirthYear is missing

  Year.last

  :   Last year in which individual could have had offspring. Can e.g.
      in mammals be the year before death for females, and year after
      death for males.

  "Birth year" may be in any arbitrary discrete time unit relevant to
  the species (day, month, decade), as long as parents are never born in
  the same time unit as their offspring, and only integers are used.
  Individuals do not need to be in the same order as in \`GenoM', nor do
  all genotyped individuals need to be included.

- AgePrior:

  logical (`TRUE/FALSE`) whether to estimate the ageprior from
  `Pedigree` and `LifeHistData`, or a matrix as generated by
  [`MakeAgePrior`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/MakeAgePrior.md)
  and included in the
  [`sequoia`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/sequoia.md) output. The
  `AgePrior` affects which relationships are considered possible: only
  those where \\P(A\|R) / P(A) \> 0\\. When `TRUE`,
  [`MakeAgePrior`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/MakeAgePrior.md)
  is called using its default values. When `FALSE`, all relationships
  are considered possible for all age differences, except that
  parent-offspring pairs cannot have age difference zero, and
  grand-parental pairs have an age difference of at least two.

- SeqList:

  list with output from
  [`sequoia`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/sequoia.md). If input
  parameter `Pedigree=NULL`, `SeqList$Pedigree` will be used if present,
  and `SeqList$PedigreePar` otherwise. If `SeqList$Specs` is present,
  input parameters with the same name as its items are ignored. The list
  elements 'LifeHist', 'AgePriors', and 'ErrM' are also used if present,
  and override the corresponding input parameters.

- Module:

  if `ped` (full pedigree), turn any non-genotyped parents in `Pedigree`
  into dummies to condition upon. If `par`, ignore any non-genotyped
  parents.

- Complex:

  Breeding system complexity. Either "full" (default), "simp"
  (simplified, no explicit consideration of inbred relationships),
  "mono" (monogamous).

- Herm:

  Hermaphrodites, either "no", "A" (distinguish between dam and sire
  role, default if at least 1 individual with sex=4), or "B" (no
  distinction between dam and sire role). Both of the latter deal with
  selfing.

- InclDup:

  logical, include the likelihood for the two samples to be duplicates
  (originating from the same individual) in the output?

- Err:

  assumed per-locus genotyping error rate, as a single number, or a
  length 3 vector with P(hom\|hom), P(het\|hom), P(hom\|het), or a 3x3
  matrix. See details below. The error rate is presumed constant across
  SNPs, and missingness is presumed random with respect to actual
  genotype. Using `Err` \>5% is not recommended, and `Err` \>10%
  strongly discouraged. See
  [`Err_RADseq`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/Err_RADseq.md) to
  convert per-allele rates at homozygous and heterozygous sites to the
  required length-3 vector, and
  [`ErrToM`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/ErrToM.md) for further
  genotyping error details.

- ErrFlavour:

  function that takes `Err` (single number) as input, and returns a
  length 3 vector or 3x3 matrix, or choose from inbuilt options
  'version2.9', 'version2.0', 'version1.3', or 'version1.1', referring
  to the sequoia version in which they were the default. Ignored if
  `Err` is a vector or matrix.

- Tassign:

  minimum LLR required for acceptance of proposed relationship, relative
  to next most likely relationship. Higher values result in more
  conservative assignments. Must be zero or positive.

- Tfilter:

  threshold log10-likelihood ratio (LLR) between a proposed relationship
  versus unrelated, to select candidate relatives. Typically a negative
  value, related to the fact that unconditional likelihoods are
  calculated during the filtering steps. More negative values may
  decrease non-assignment, but will increase computational time.

- quiet:

  logical, suppress messages

- Plot:

  logical, display scatter plots by
  [`PlotPairLL`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/PlotPairLL.md).

## Value

The `Pairs` dataframe including all optional columns listed above, plus
the additional columns:

- xx:

  Log10-Likelihood of this pair having relationship xx, with xx being
  the relationship abbreviations listed below.

- TopRel:

  Abbreviation of most likely relationship

- LLR:

  Log10-Likelihood ratio between most-likely and second most likely
  relationships. Other LLRs, e.g. between most-likely and unrelated, can
  easily be computed.

**Relationship abbreviations:**

- PO:

  Parent - offspring

- FS:

  Full siblings

- HS:

  Half siblings

- GP:

  Grandparent

- FA:

  Full avuncular

- HA:

  Half avuncular and other 3rd degree relationships

- U:

  Unrelated

- 2nd:

  Unclear which type of 2nd degree relatives (HS, GP, or FA)

- ??:

  Unclear which type of 1st, 2nd or 3rd degree relatives

**Likelihood special codes:**

- 222:

  Maybe (via) other parent (e.g. focal="GP", but as likely to be
  maternal as paternal grandparent, and therefore not assignable)

- 333:

  Excluded from comparison (shouldn't occur)

- 444:

  Not implemented (e.g. would create an odd double/triple relationship
  in combination with the provided pedigree)

- 777:

  Impossible (e.g. a male (Sex2=2) cannot be mother (patmat=1))

- 888:

  Already assigned in the provided pedigree (see `dropPar` arguments)

- 999:

  `NA`. If all values for the pair are `999`, one or both individuals
  are not genotyped and not dummifiable.

## Details

The same pair may be included multiple times, e.g. with different sex,
age difference, or focal relationship, to explore their effect on the
likelihoods. Likelihoods are only calculated for relationships that are
possible given the age difference, e.g. PO (parent-offspring) is not
calculated for pairs with an age difference of 0.

Non-genotyped individuals can be included if they have at least one
genotyped offspring and can be turned into a dummy (see
[`getAssignCat`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/getAssignCat.md));
to establish this a pedigree must be provided.

**Warning 1**: There is no check whether the input pedigree is
genetically sensible, it is simply conditioned upon. Checking whether a
pedigree is compatible with the SNP data can be done with
[`CalcOHLLR`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/CalcOHLLR.md).

**Warning 2**: Conditioning on a `Pedigree` can make computation orders
of magnitude slower.

## Why does it say 444 (no can do) for all relationships?

This happens when the pair does not pass the initial check which
prevents impossible configurations in combination with `Pedigree`.
Specifically, it happens when either or both individuals are a parent in
the pedigree, but

- the sex in `Pairs` is not consistent with that

- `Pairs` changes the age differences; it is too complex to check
  whether or not this still makes all pedigree links valid. Only setting
  the age difference to 'unknown' via `Pairs` is possible.

## Why does it say 777 (impossible)?

This function uses the same machinery as `sequoia`, which will to save
time not calculate the likelihood when it is quickly obvious that the
pair cannot be related in the specified manner.

For PO (putative parent-offspring pairs) this is the case when:

- the sex of the candidate parent, via `Pairs$Sex2` or `LifeHistData`,
  does not match `Pairs$patmat`, which defaults to 1 (maternal
  relatives, i.e. dam)

- a dam is already assigned via `Pedigree` and `Pairs$dropPar1 ='none'`,
  and `Pairs$patmat = 1`

- the age difference is zero or otherwise impossible according to the
  age prior. It is either calculated from `LifeHistData` or specified
  via `Pairs$AgeDif`. The `AgePrior` can be specified directly, be taken
  from `SeqList`, or calculated automatically by
  [`MakeAgePrior`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/MakeAgePrior.md)
  when both `Pedigree` and `LifeHistData` are provided.

## Double relationships & focal relationship

Especially when Complex='full', not only the seven relationship
alternatives listed above are considered, but a whole range of possible
double and even triple relationships. For example, mother A and
offspring B (PO) may also be paternal half-siblings (HS, A and A's
mother mated with same male), grandmother and grand-offspring (GP, B's
father is A's son), or paternal aunt (B's father is a full or half sib
of A).

The likelihood reported as 'LL_PO' is the most-likely one of the
possible alternatives, among those that are not impossible due to age
differences or due to the pedigree (as reconstructed up to that point).
Whether e.g. the likelihood to be both PO & HS is counted as PO or as
HS, depends on the situation and is determined by the variable 'focal':
During parentage assignment, it is counted as PO but not HS, while
during sibship clustering, it is counted as HS but not PO – not omitting
from the alternative relationship would result in a deadlock.

## Dummy individuals

For historical reasons, the relationships between a dummy ID1 and ID2
are reported \*between the sibship and ID2\*. So,

- `PO`: ID2 replaces dummy ID1; or merge dummy ID2 with dummy ID1

- `FS, HS`: ID1 parent of ID2

- `GP`: ID2 parent of ID1

- `FA,HA`: ID2 FS resp. HS of ID1

If ID1 is genotyped and ID2 is a dummy, the relationships are as when
ID2 is genotyped.

If you wish to retrieve likelihoods for a different set of
relationships, please contact me at <jisca.huisman@gmail.com> .

## See also

[`PlotPairLL`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/PlotPairLL.md) to plot
alternative relationship pairs from the output;
[`LLtoProb`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/LLtoProb.md) to
transform likelihoods to probabilities;
[`CalcParentProbs`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/CalcParentProbs.md)
which uses this function to calculate parental probabilities;
[`GetRelM`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/GetRelM.md) to find all
pairwise relatives according to the pedigree;
[`GetMaybeRel`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/GetMaybeRel.md) to
get likely relative pairs based on the genetic data.

## Examples

``` r
# Likelihoods depend on the presumed genotyping error rate:
CalcPairLL(Pairs = data.frame(ID1='i042_2003_F', ID2='i015_2001_F'),
           GenoM = Geno_griffin, Err = 1e-7, Plot=FALSE)
#> ℹ Not conditioning on any pedigree
#>           ID1         ID2 Sex1 Sex2 AgeDif focal patmat dropPar1 dropPar2
#> 1 i042_2003_F i015_2001_F    3    3     NA     U      1     none     none
#>        PO      FS      HS      GP      FA      HA       U TopRel  LLR
#> 1 -319.07 -323.42 -319.01 -322.13 -321.05 -322.33 -337.08     HS 0.06
CalcPairLL(Pairs = data.frame(ID1='i042_2003_F', ID2='i015_2001_F'),
           GenoM = Geno_griffin, Err = 1e-3, Plot=FALSE)
#> ℹ Not conditioning on any pedigree
#>           ID1         ID2 Sex1 Sex2 AgeDif focal patmat dropPar1 dropPar2
#> 1 i042_2003_F i015_2001_F    3    3     NA     U      1     none     none
#>       PO      FS      HS      GP      FA      HA       U TopRel  LLR
#> 1 -315.1 -323.38 -319.01 -322.11 -321.06 -322.36 -337.07     PO 3.91


## likelihoods underlying parent LLR in pedigree:
# Example: dams for bottom 3 individuals
tail(SeqOUT_griffin$PedigreePar, n=3)
#>              id         dam        sire LLRdam LLRsire LLRpair OHdam OHsire
#> 140 i198_2010_M i166_2009_F        <NA>   8.62      NA      NA     1     NA
#> 141 i199_2010_F i165_2009_F i141_2008_M  14.67    4.96   16.17     0      0
#> 142 i200_2010_F i166_2009_F i142_2008_M  14.41    5.56   15.63     0      0
#>     MEpair
#> 140     NA
#> 141      0
#> 142      0
# set up dataframe with these pairs. LLRdam & LLRsire ignore any co-parent
Pairs_d <- data.frame(ID1 = SeqOUT_griffin$PedigreePar$id[140:142],
                      ID2 = SeqOUT_griffin$PedigreePar$dam[140:142],
                      focal = "PO",
                      dropPar1 = 'both')

# Calculate LL's, conditional on the rest of the pedigree + age differences
CalcPairLL(Pairs_d, GenoM = Geno_griffin, Err = 1e-04,
           LifeHistData = LH_griffin, Pedigree = SeqOUT_griffin$PedigreePar)
#> ℹ Conditioning on pedigree with 142 individuals, 65 dams and 79 sires

#> ℹ Ageprior: Pedigree-based, overlapping generations, flattened, MaxAgeParent = 99,99
#> Transferring input pedigree ...

#>           ID1         ID2 Sex1 Sex2 AgeDif focal patmat dropPar1 dropPar2
#> 1 i198_2010_M i166_2009_F    2    1      1    PO      1     both     none
#> 2 i199_2010_F i165_2009_F    1    1      1    PO      1     both     none
#> 3 i200_2010_F i166_2009_F    1    1      1    PO      1     both     none
#>        PO      FS      HS  GP      FA      HA       U TopRel   LLR
#> 1 -289.23 -374.32 -299.18 777 -297.85 -300.15 -310.28     PO  8.62
#> 2 -279.66 -359.15 -295.41 777 -294.33 -297.09 -310.77     PO 14.67
#> 3 -283.94 -363.30 -298.42 777 -298.35 -299.93 -312.93     PO 14.41

# LLR changes when ignoring age and/or pedigree, as different relationships
# become (im)possible
CalcPairLL(Pairs_d, GenoM = Geno_griffin, Err = 1e-04)
#> ℹ Not conditioning on any pedigree

#>           ID1         ID2 Sex1 Sex2 AgeDif focal patmat dropPar1 dropPar2
#> 1 i198_2010_M i166_2009_F    3    3     NA    PO      1     both     none
#> 2 i199_2010_F i165_2009_F    3    3     NA    PO      1     both     none
#> 3 i200_2010_F i166_2009_F    3    3     NA    PO      1     both     none
#>        PO      FS      HS      GP      FA      HA       U TopRel  LLR
#> 1 -308.78 -314.22 -312.81 -311.20 -313.25 -315.13 -329.70     PO 2.42
#> 2 -304.43 -310.40 -311.86 -309.98 -313.78 -317.06 -335.69     PO 5.54
#> 3 -303.14 -309.52 -310.47 -307.39 -311.26 -315.02 -332.35     PO 4.24

# LLRpair is calculated conditional on co-parent, and min. of dam & sire LLR
Pairs_d$dropPar1 <- 'dam'
Pairs_s <- data.frame(ID1 = SeqOUT_griffin$PedigreePar$id[141:142],
                      ID2 = SeqOUT_griffin$PedigreePar$sire[141:142],
                      focal = "PO",
                      dropPar1 = 'sire')
CalcPairLL(rbind(Pairs_d, Pairs_s), GenoM = Geno_griffin, Err = 1e-04,
           LifeHistData = LH_griffin, Pedigree = SeqOUT_griffin$PedigreePar)
#> ℹ Conditioning on pedigree with 142 individuals, 65 dams and 79 sires

#> ℹ Ageprior: Pedigree-based, overlapping generations, flattened, MaxAgeParent = 99,99
#> Transferring input pedigree ...

#>           ID1         ID2 Sex1 Sex2 AgeDif focal patmat dropPar1 dropPar2
#> 1 i198_2010_M i166_2009_F    2    1      1    PO      1      dam     none
#> 2 i199_2010_F i165_2009_F    1    1      1    PO      1      dam     none
#> 3 i200_2010_F i166_2009_F    1    1      1    PO      1      dam     none
#> 4 i199_2010_F i141_2008_M    1    2      2    PO      2     sire     none
#> 5 i200_2010_F i142_2008_M    1    2      2    PO      2     sire     none
#>        PO      FS      HS      GP      FA      HA       U TopRel   LLR
#> 1 -289.23 -374.32 -299.18  777.00 -297.85 -300.15 -310.28     PO  8.62
#> 2 -239.97  777.00 -262.19  777.00 -259.82 -266.02 -282.76     PO 19.85
#> 3 -245.87  777.00 -265.52  777.00 -266.47 -271.87 -287.07     PO 19.64
#> 4 -235.68  777.00 -361.87 -251.85 -254.73 -263.57 -275.37     PO 16.17
#> 5 -240.97  777.00 -263.38 -256.61 -258.66 -263.96 -279.04     PO 15.63


## likelihoods underlying LLR in getMaybeRel output:
MaybeRel_griffin$MaybePar[1:5, ]
#>           ID1         ID2 TopRel  LLR OH BirthYear1 BirthYear2 AgeDif Sex1 Sex2
#> 1 i091_2005_F i118_2006_M     PO 8.55  0         NA         NA     NA    3    3
#> 2 i127_2007_M i197_2010_F     PO 7.90  0         NA         NA     NA    3    3
#> 3 i121_2007_M i175_2009_M     PO 7.85  0         NA         NA     NA    3    3
#> 4 i030_2002_F i061_2004_F     PO 7.75  0         NA         NA     NA    3    3
#> 5 i041_2003_F i080_2004_M     PO 7.71  0         NA         NA     NA    3    3
#>   SNPdBoth
#> 1      392
#> 2      392
#> 3      392
#> 4      392
#> 5      392
FivePairs <- MaybeRel_griffin$MaybePar[1:5, c("ID1", "ID2", "Sex1", "Sex2")]
PairLL <- CalcPairLL(Pairs = rbind( cbind(FivePairs, focal = "PO"),
                                    cbind(FivePairs, focal = "HS"),
                                    cbind(FivePairs, focal = "GP")),
                     GenoM = Geno_griffin, Plot=FALSE)
#> ℹ Not conditioning on any pedigree
PairLL[PairLL$ID1=="i121_2007_M", ]
#>            ID1         ID2 Sex1 Sex2 AgeDif focal patmat dropPar1 dropPar2
#> 3  i121_2007_M i175_2009_M    3    3     NA    PO      1     none     none
#> 8  i121_2007_M i175_2009_M    3    3     NA    HS      1     none     none
#> 13 i121_2007_M i175_2009_M    3    3     NA    GP      1     none     none
#>         PO      FS      HS      GP      FA      HA       U TopRel  LLR
#> 3  -313.21 -324.46 -321.90 -321.51 -322.83 -323.01 -337.98     PO 8.30
#> 8  -313.21  222.00 -321.09 -321.51 -323.01 -321.90 -337.98     PO 7.88
#> 13 -313.21 -324.46 -321.09 -321.51 -322.83 -325.26 -337.98     PO 7.88
# LL(FS)==222 : HSHA, HSGP, and/or FAHA more likely than FS
# LL(GP) higher when focal=HS: GP via 'other' parent also considered
# LL(FA) higher when focal=PO: FAHA, or FS of 'other' parent
```
