# Check Data for Duplicates.

Check the genotype and life history data for duplicate IDs (not
permitted) and duplicated genotypes (not advised), and count how many
individuals in the genotype data are not included in the life history
data (permitted). The order of IDs in the genotype and life history data
is not required to be identical.

## Usage

``` r
DuplicateCheck(GenoM = NULL, FortPARAM.dup, dupratio = 5, quiet)
```

## Arguments

- GenoM:

  matrix with genotype data, size nInd x nSnp.

- FortPARAM.dup:

  list with Fortran-ready parameter values, as generated by
  [`MkFortParams`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/MkFortParams.md).

- dupratio:

  number setting the maximum number of returned duplicates (dupratio \*
  nInd)

- quiet:

  suppress messages.

## Value

A list with one or more of the following elements:

- DupGenoID:

  Dataframe, row numbers of duplicated IDs in genotype data. Please do
  remove or relabel these to avoid downstream confusion.

- DupGenotype:

  Dataframe, duplicated genotypes (with or without identical IDs). The
  specified number of maximum mismatches is allowed, and this dataframe
  may include pairs of closely related individuals. Mismatch = number of
  SNPs at which genotypes differ, LLR = likelihood ratio between 'self'
  and most likely non-self.

## See also

[`CheckLH`](https://jiscah.github.io/reference/CheckLH.md), which
performs the check for duplicated IDs in the life history data, as well
as for IDs (in genotype data) for which no life history data is
provided.
